---
layout: post
type: professional
title: "[List] Books on Doing Good"
date: 2023-06-06
---
Last Updated: 2024-06-04

This is a page (that will be updated regularly) of books that I've read (and at least partially recommend) on how to do good in the world. While there may be some books that stray into the philosophical and ethical, most of them will be concerned more with the "how" than the "why". Most of the books on list list I can't recommend in my general reading list as they are audience/intent specific, but for me, reading them has been an essential part of my work.

### *Invention and Innovation: A History of Hype and Failure* by Vaclav Smil
Smil explores (through detailed historical anecdote) our tendency to overestimate the impact and benefit of the new. I have a difficult time recommending this book wholesale as I think the main argument of the book isn't necessarily proven (in a logical sense) by the 9 primary examples carefully selected and exposited by the author, but the awareness of constraints and nuance that he brings are most certainly useful. Some of the main ideas from the book:
- Naive belief that all of our problems will be solved by a miracle technology in the next 10, 20, or 50 years typically ignores fundamental physical constraints, the cost and complexity of engineering after a fundamental discovery, the history of work on the problem already, and the economic and political realities the prospective technology will interact with.
- In the case of climate change, in particular, the decarbonization goals set by the UN (and its member countries) are optimistic indpendent of the availability of new inventions. As an example, electrifying transportation by the dates set will require more electric vehicles to be produced each year than all combined vehicle production in any year prior.
- Many hard problems require holistic solutions, involving collective changes in more than one area.
- Even incredible advances in computational technology and AI don't trivialize problems bound by physical constraints - e.g. the search for better refrigerants, where nearly all feasible molecules have been explored, or in-air transportation speeds, where speed and efficiency are directly at odds.
- Real tradeoffs between different forms of wellbeing among different people have to be navigated, and industrial-scale mass-application of technologies often have unintended consequences, sometimes both long-lasting and undetectable for a very long time.
- We tend to overstate the significance of individual discoveries.

I don't agree with all of the conclusions Smil draws, but I find his sober (and counter-culturally concrete) evaluation of technological progress to be quite helpful in rebalancing my expectations for the future.

### *The Power to Get Things Done (Whether You Feel Like It or Not)* by Seve Levinson, PhD, and Chris Cooper
This is more or less a self-help book focused on "Follow-Through", but is informed by both a clinical and consulting background. The punchline of the book is essentially that motivation is temporary and unreliable, so it's important to use moments of motivation to change your future circumstances so that you'll do the right thing when the time comes. One of my favorite examples from the book was a business executive who hated going to the gym, so he decided to keep his deodorant in his rented gym locker. Not having any at home, he would have to physically go to the gym before work anyway or risk the embarrassment of growing smelly. Leveraging your weak motivation into greater follow-through requires some creativity and self-knowledge, but common strategies include involving other people, creating consequences (social or practical), making non-compliance impossible (and removing temptations), and replacing "achievement" goals with "showing up" goals.

In the context of doing good, my main takeaway is that there's strong evidence from psychological research that my good intentions won't result in doing good. I can't personally conceive of the true magnitude of the problems we're tackling --- who can imagine millions of people suffering in a way that's truly more felt than the suffering of one person that you know well? So I need to use my rare rational and sober-minded moments to trick, coerce, and manipulate my future self into doing the right thing by making it near-impossible for my future self to do otherwise.

## Business, Entrepreneurship, and Management
This subsection is specifically on books that relate to starting, growing, and managing organizations. Organizations are powerful tools for increasing the scale of impact.

### *Zero to One* by Peter Thiel
Peter presents his philosophy on what makes a good startup. Highly impactful startups are those that create something new (the number existing goes from "zero to one"), as opposed to those that repeat and refine what has come before ("one to many"). Starting a business is hard, and there's more implicit competition for money, time, and attention than we realize. Startups shouldn't delude themselves into thinking that a highly targeted and untapped market exists, and should explicitly focus in on a niche where they can provide a solution that's at least 10x better than anything already available. A good indicator of a startup's likelihood of success is its "monopoly potential". Is there a reason why the company might be the "last mover" in a field? (Note: Peter interprets monopoly more generally/pragmatically than in legal practice. To him, Google has a monopoly on search, for example, despite the existence of plausible alternatives.) Peter suggests that the amount of value created and the proportion of that value captured by a company are largely independent. He argues that the greatest value is in creating new markets, which is also where the largest percentage of the created value can be captured (because it isn't driven down by competition).

Peter also offers some practical wisdom on getting started. Founding teams matter in terms of their expertise, but even more so in terms of their ability to collaborate productively. Compensation and incentives need to induce long-term values alignment. The startup needs to view hiring as a core competency (it shouldn't be outsourced), and needs to have a compelling reason for talented individuals to pass up higher-compensation opportunities. The company should outsource activities that are not central to its 10x advantage.

While I don't think Peter's rules have to be hard and fast, the premise that enduring companies start by rapidly capturing a niche market with a 10x advantage is a useful prioritization mechanism over possible directions and ideas. But this is only helpful to the extent that the identified niche can be reliably targeted and scalably serviced.

### *The Lean Startup* by Eric Ries
I was put off from reading this book for many years by people who misquoted and apparently misunderstood its primary message. The book is old enough (published 2011) and influential enough that many of its ideas have become quite widespread, at least as memetic touchpoints. As far as I can tell, Eric coined the term "pivot" in the context of entrepreneurial strategy, popularized the idea of "validating" testable business "hypotheses", and popularized the idea of a "minimum viable product". A great irony is that Eric (who is an engineer, and suggests applying the engine of science to discovery of viable businesses) has had his ideas misrepresented by a great number of people without scientific training who use the vocabulary of science, but not its substance. (This is ironic because he explicitly warns against the development of an entrepreneurial pseudoscience near the end of his book.) When I finally got around to actually reading the book, it was revelatory.

The title of the book comes from the inspiration that he drew from Lean Manufacturing (initially driven by innovation at Toyota) in creating organizations that could rapidly discover a viable business under conditions of extreme uncertainty. He posits that for a startup, the primary measure of progress should be validated learning (the development of a theory about the customers, product, and market at large that inform testable improvements to the business), and he speaks against the procedural waste of working very hard to ultimately deliver a failing product. (A common misconception is that "lean" refers to the startup's finances, not its production. The book is in fact, about minimizing wasted business development effort.)

Eric posits that every viable business is based on at least two premises ("hypotheses"). The **value hypothesis** is a prediction about a kind of product/service/activity/result that will be perceived as valuable by customers. The **growth hypothesis** is a prediction about a mechanism by which the number of customers engaging with the business will grow. The goal of a startup should be to develop validated theories for each of these questions by experimentally invalidating key assumptions as quickly as possible. Eric elaborates on key processes that help accelerate the "Build-Measure-Learn" cycle, allowing faster end-to-end learning on statistical samples of real customers, measuring real behavior.

One of the most valuable parts of the book was Eric's elaboration on effective metrics for testing growth hypotheses. He identifies three kinds of business-driven growth: sticky, where users accumulate because they stay a long time, and where cohort-based retention/churn metrics are the most meaningful; viral, where the product itself drives engagement of new users, and where the "infection rate" is the key thing to measure; and paid, where revenue is spent directly on acquiring new customers, and where the cost of acquiring a customer is the key metric. The sticky/viral/paid ontology is artificial and imperfect --- most businesses are composites --- but the question of whether growth is being primarily driven by the product, current users, or revenue is very helpful in identifying which growth metrics should be prioritized.

For those new to Lean methods (or those with only secondhand exposure) - the illustrative analogies to other business types will also be very helpful. It is easy for individuals to feel they are being productive when they are engaging in their (individually) highest-value activity. But this leads to unseen or unowned waste (e.g. unusable inventory, engineering of products no one will buy). It's critical to reorient teams around organizational success metrics that prioritize total system performance.

### *The Goal* by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
The Goal is a business fable that focuses on the application of lean processes to modern manufacturing. After reading the Lean Startup, this (and the included article at the end, "Standing on the Shoulders of Giants") gave me a much deeper understanding of the principles motivating lean system design. Where before, Kanban-based agile task planning (controlling the amount of "inventory" at any stage of completion) was incomprehensible to me, I now have a lot of clarity around when it is and isn't beneficial and what problem it's trying to solve.

Some of the big ideas of the book are that the thing that matters (the goal) should be defined at the whole system level, and often requires sacrificing the "efficiency" of system subparts. This is very counterintuitive to people whose view is on an individual component of the system (say a component, machine, worker, member, or employee). In fact, overproduction of non-rate-limiting parts (or completion of unnecessary tasks) is not just a form of waste, but often counterproductive (backlog build-up and resource activation slow down production along the critical path). The book explores a number of concepts and techniques that are abstract enough to be applied to a wide variety of operational tasks. Another major counterintuitive insight is that optimizing for throughput, or flow (minimizing total per-task production time) is generally much better for a business' bottom line than focusing on operational cost savings.

When I think about how these lessons apply to education, I think there is a deep perspective shift that could unlock significant gains, but the lessons are difficult to apply as the relative complexity and ambiguity are much higher than in traditional manufacturing. To start with, what if the goal were to maximize throughput (say, end-to-end how quickly students mastered their defined curriculum) rather than to minimize operating costs (maximize learning per dollar spent)? This would be a major cultural shift for US Public Education and would require better ways of certifying educational completion (e.g. a more socially-promoted GED). 

Maybe at some point I'll update this post or my book with some follow-up thoughts on the implications.

### *The Choice* by Eliyahu M. Goldratt and Efrat Goldratt-Ashlag
Written more than 25 years after _The Goal_, _The Choice_ attempts to generalize a philosophy about life from a series of business case studies in the form of a dialogue between a father and daughter. I think it's largely successful, although most of the takeaways are more in the style of "practical truths" rather than "literal truths". That is, it is much more useful to believe the premises of the book than to believe otherwise, regardless of whether they uniformly reflect reality. The general principles are:
- "Causes" generally produce multiple "effects". As a consequence, most of reality (even complex organizations) are governed by a small set of fundamental principles. Eli calls this "Inherent Simplicity". Acting on the premise of inherent simplicity is the eponymous choice; it is the choice to think clearly, even when it removes our excuses.
- When we believe reality is complex, we believe solutions must be complicated, making many problems intractable. We consequently camouflage persistent problems and settle for efforts with diminishing returns. (A great example from the book was how businesses can view being "sold out" of a good as a marketing success, rather than an operational failure. The reality is that companies would provide a greater service and earn more money if they didn't experience shortages.) We are also tempted to stop when we find a good solution, rather than looking for a better one.
- Most conflicts are due to differing assumptions (different mental understandings of the cause-and-effect networks we interact with). Forced compromises are unscientific. Scientific thinking seeks to root out and remove invalid assumptions. When we resolve the apparent contradiction, we achieve new understanding and a "breakthrough" that has practical implications.
- Perhaps ironically, one of the false assumptions that is highlighted as prevalent is the belief that one can predict future demand accurately. This leads to inventory accumulation (operational overhead), overproduction of low-demand items, and competition to allocate the risk elsewhere on the value chain. An intervention that has been successful in many of the cases considered has been to favor responsiveness (replenishment to actual consumption) over prediction.
- Scientific thinking necessitates being sensitive to and testing tautologies. E.g. the business is not succeeding because customer tastes have changed. How can we detect if the provided explation is false?

In terms of the implications for my work, I think my main takeaway is that the pinnacle of strategic thinking is simplification and clarity. By focusing on fundamentals and reevaluating assumptions around education (it has to happen at certain ages, under a certain delivery model, within a certain scope, etc.), large breakthroughs can be made. The prevalent assumption I think most undermines educational efficacy is the functional belief that seat time is the bottleneck on student learning.

### *$100M Offers* by Alex Hormozi (and its sequel, *$100M Leads*)
This book doesn't use tactful language, but it does present a useful abstraction over sales and consumer decision-making. Alex claims that the value consumers attribute to an offering is driven by four factors:
- The Dream Outcome (/Current Pain) - What is the gap (and how clearly envisioned is it) between the customer's current reality and their end goal? The bigger the problem you solve, the more valuable the solution. Framing affects the value proposition a lot.
- The Perceived Likelihood of Achievement - How confident is the customer that your solution will actually solve their problem? This is an especially important factor for startups, as they usually have low brand credibility, but they can improve purchase confidence by demonstrating evidence of past success, giving customers trials, and by offering guarantees.
- The Perceived Time Delay between Start and Achievement - People value immediacy, often disproportionately. This also plays into the factor above and below.
- The Perceived Effort and Sacrifice - Outside of the financial cost, there's the effort of learning how to use the solution, the potential changes that will have to be made as a consequence of the solution, and the ongoing effort that remains. Streamlining purchase and onboarding processes has an enormous impact on the attractiveness of an offering.

Notably, these four factors are all primarily perceptual (although they are hopefully based on real considerations), and startups tend to overindex on just one or two of these dials, missing opportunities to capture more of the real value they are offering.

In the sequel, *$100M Leads*, Alex provides some frameworks for thinking about marketing that help to make sense of how businesses with a winning offer (a product and price point some people want) can scale sales of that one offer to the size of the available market. Although the book does offer some interesting tactics, I think its main value is actually in the clarity it brings to the sales scaling process and the benchmark numbers it uses to help with diagnosing scaling bottlenecks. After reading *The Goal*, I see a lot of parallels around identifying and addressing bottlenecks, then scaling until the next limiting factor is reached. I left the book with a clear picture of what it looks like to scale a profitable business effectively, but as Alex points out many times in the book, many businesses don't scale because their offer isn't as good as they think it is. Some of the big ideas that I found elucidating:
- A great way to build trust (increasing buyers' confidence, and therefore the price they're willing to pay) is to give potential customers a low-stakes way to "practice" doing business with you. For example, they might trade their time, attention, or contact information for a free "lead magnet" that provides some immediate value to them (and hopefully also illustrates the potential value of your main offering).
- To engage with potential customers (leads), there are three questions to answer that affect what that looks like:
  - Are you doing the work, or is someone else? (Businesses often scale by moving work from the founder to scalable processes.)
  - Are these leads people who already know about you, or people who don't?
  - Are you reaching out to these leads privately (one at a time), or publicly (many at a time)?
- Speed of scaling comes down to the ratio between lifetime gross profit and customer acquisition cost, and time to recoup the outlay. Discounts for paying up-front can bring ROI timelines inside the "magic" 30-day window where cheap credit can eliminate cash as a bottleneck on business expansion.
- When you plateau with an operationally-profitable business, the first question to ask is whether you can just do more of what you're already doing (e.g. scale advertising or free content production by a factor of 10). If you can't (say because of diminishing returns), then you should ask if you can do the same kind of thing, but better. If that's unrealistic (e.g. you're already performing within a factor of 3 of market competitors), then you should ask what new approach you'll add on next (e.g. a new platform or different answers to the 3 earlier questions).
- As you scale, your core offering will need to continue to improve in order to appeal to broader audiences. Referral rate is a great metric for product quality and also a primary factor in scalable growth.

This is a book that feels common-sense in hindsight, but probably affected my thinking a lot more than I realize.

### *Team of Teams* by General Stanley McChrystal (with Tantum Collins, Chris Fussell, and David Silverman)
Stan McChrystal was the director of the US Special Task Force in the war on Al Queda in Iraq (AQI), and relates how the task force was transformed over the course of the war from a siloed organization overindexing on individual efficiencies to a responsive organization that optimized for end-to-end organizational efficacy. While the context of the war was illuminating (I was too young to know much about it when it was happening), the lessons for management tie in quite nicely with the takeaways from _The Goal_ and _The Lean Startup_.

For a military organization, success isn't measured directly in fiscal sustainability, but there is a regular operational cadence (Find a target, Fix its location, Finish, Exploit for intelligence, and Analyze to find new targets). In the early stages of the war, the siloed constituent organizations in the task force worked efficiently as isolated teams, but long or missed handoffs between teams, misaligned strategic priorities, and internal fragmentation of knowledge led to many missed opportunities and overlong cycle times, meaning that once a target in the terrorist network had been caputured, intelligence gathered from them was often no longer useful by the time it made it through the organization.

Similar to _The Goal_ and _The Lean Startup_, a major theme is that organizations where individuals optimize for their own "efficiency" or "productivity" often lead to massive waste at an organizational level. If we think about the unutilized intelligence of the task force as inventory, and take _The Goal_'s target of maximizing throughput, organizational efficiency is all about minimizing the time between when intelligence is first collected and when it culminates in gathering more intelligence.

General McChrystal identifies two major thrusts that transformed the task force and led to a more than 17x increase in organizational throughput. The first was creating a "shared consciousness" --- aggressively aggregating and sharing knowledge across the organization, redesigning physical spaces to encourage communication and transparency, and creating extensive rotational liaison programs to improve inter-team trust and functional understanding. The second major thrust was to empower distributed decision-making, reducing communication overhead and eliminating bottlenecks on in-situ responsiveness. McChrystal frames this as a major challenge to leadership to shift from being heroes to being gardeners. Where Taylor, Ford, and other business pioneers found system-level efficiencies by standardizing repetitive processes, many modern problems are now made difficult by their dynamism. It is responsiveness (or agility), not single-task efficiency, that determines the success of many modern organizations.

### *Rocket Fuel* by Gino Wickman and Mark C. Winters

This book exhibits several of the genre tropes I dislike in business literature:
- Despite its brevity, the book feels too long for its concept.
- It's full of trademarked names for generic concepts.
- Most of the anecdotes lack the detail necessary to take them beyond exercises in circular reasoning.

Despite this, there were some very useful nuggets. The main premise of the book is that most mid-size businesses are bottlenecked by the founder trying to manage both the future-facing and present aspects of the business. By separating the responsibilities of the "visionary" (R&D, partnerships, and strategy) from the responsibilities of the "integrator" (operations, management), most companies can scale much faster. This resembles the typical CEO/COO split in most large companies, and the authors highlight that these two leadership roles draw on very different strengths (big picture thinking vs. detail orientation, e.g.) and are typically very difficult for any one person to do simultaneously.

---
